(box clunks)
(tape tearing)
(chilled lo-fi music)
(wrap rustling)
(upbeat electronic music)
- So usually, one crazy thing
about a new piece of tech
is enough to get my attention,
just something out of
the ordinary about it.
But this new Mac mini
has three things about it that are insane.
So instead of having an event this year,
Apple decided to do a bunch
of press releases in a row
for the last week of October
to update their whole Mac lineup to M4.
And one of them was for this new Mac mini.
Now, a lot of us might not give
too much thought to the Mac mini,
like, yeah, maybe it
holds an important place
as the most affordable Mac,
but if you're not buying one,
you're not really thinking
about it too much.
But the number one most insane
thing about this refresh is,
well, I mean look at it, it's tiny.
It is absolutely tiny.
Apple's gone through and redesigned
basically all of their computers now
that have gotten the Mac silicon update.
Well, except this one,
this is the same design as a while ago,
but the Mac mini was kind of technically
overdue for a redesign.
And the new one, it actually
kinda looks a little bit more
like a shrunken Mac Studio
than a shrunken old Mac mini.
But it's now a five inch
by five inch footprint
and two inches tall.
I'll say that again, a five by
five by two desktop computer.
Now I like small desktops,
and yes, you could get a
tiny desktop computer before,
there's plenty of amazing
mini ITX build videos
all over the internet that
I've watched for years.
They're sick.
But there's levels to this,
there's small computers and
then there's tiny computers.
And this Mac mini is smaller
than my R5 with a lens on it.
It's smaller than a new roll of duct tape.
It's smaller than the
footprint of the new iPhone
and barely bigger than the
absolutely tiny Apple TV.
Apple's seemingly had this obsession
with making certain computers
as small as possible,
even before Apple silicon came along.
So this has just kind of
unlocked another level for them
to push it even further than ever before.
Yeah, there are fans in here,
but there are also ports on the back.
Gigabit ethernet by default,
full size HDMI is still here.
And then three Thunderbolt
ports on the back
and then there's two
USB-C 3 ports on the front
plus the headphone jack.
So still no SD card reader.
And there's obviously now no more USB-A.
If you tried to build
or buy another computer
to match this thing,
you will either end up building a computer
that's just as small but
nowhere near as capable,
or a computer that's just as capable,
but nowhere near as small.
It is just a hilariously
unnecessarily tiny computer.
It's great.
I would also like to start
a new conspiracy theory.
I would like to use this video
to start a conspiracy theory.
I think that there is someone
whose job it is at Apple,
someone whose sole purpose
(sinister mysterious music)
is to come up with one obnoxious
thing to complain about
for every new Apple product redesign.
Like this is the person that
put the notch on the iPhone.
This is the person that
put the charge port
at the bottom of the Magic Mouse.
And this person's best work is right here
on this new Mac mini,
putting the power button
on the bottom of it.
Like, why?
There are so many better
places to put a power button,
like at the front or the side,
or literally anywhere on the back,
like all the other small Mac desktops.
Or at the top. That
would've been fine too.
But no, they chose behind the back corner,
which is (sighs) just...
I mean, I don't use
that button very often.
I don't really turn the Mac on
and off with a button almost ever.
I might sleep it and wake it back up,
and maybe every couple of weeks,
I'll have to remember that
the button's back there.
But yeah, it's just dumb
enough to get memed on
and complained about without
actually being an issue.
Well played, guy.
But yeah, you know, the
typical consequences
of a computer getting smaller
are battery, speakers, and thermals.
There's just less room
inside for those things.
Battery of course doesn't make a huge
difference on a desktop, who cares?
Speakers, kind of the
same thing, who cares?
And thermals have been redesigned in a way
that seem to be working just fine.
This thing hardly gets over a peep.
If you do heavy stuff,
the single fan spins up
and you can hear it, but
it's always been quiet,
sitting on the desk,
you can hardly hear it.
So then the number two insane
thing about the new Mac mini
is that the base model is kind
of an incredible deal now.
No, like I don't think you understand it.
I think it's actually one
of the best deals in tech.
It's certainly the best out of any
of Apple's new product
offerings right now.
And I mean, I'm kind of
not used to saying it,
but it is a really good deal.
So this base M4 Mac mini costs 599, right?
So for that, you get the base
computer with the M4 chip,
which has quietly doubled
to 16 gigs of unified memory
instead of eight from before.
So the 10 core CPU and the 10 core GPU.
Now we're four generations
into Apple silicon
and the gains are
actually kind of starting
to stack up versus M1.
We already know it was a huge difference
from the Intel chips, but I
actually wanna get a little bit
more into that in the MacBook Pro review
because I've been using
an M1 Max MacBook Pro
for three years since it came out.
And the M4 Max is the first one
that's actually tempted me to upgrade
between generations of Apple silicon.
It's really interesting.
So get subscribed and
stay tuned for that video
when it comes out.
But the main thing you need to know is
this base M4 chip is great,
it's super solid and power efficient
at everyday normal
activities like web browsing
and music streaming and
multitasking like crazy.
And it can handle what
I think I would call
medium-grade activities very easily.
Not heavy stuff like
graphically-intensive gaming
or a heavy video editing,
but pretty much anything short of that.
This could be a coding
and developing machine,
this could be a photo editing machine.
Pixelmator runs like a dream.
And fun fact, Apple just bought
Pixelmator, interestingly.
But yeah, just having
a ton of Arc tabs open,
stuff like that, like just
running around, multitasking,
it runs like a dream, it's great.
It's as good as you'd expect
the world's fastest single
core performer to do.
So yeah, Mac mini, you know,
four years, like I said,
it has been the most affordable Mac,
the sort of entry point for
anyone to get into Mac OS.
But this year with the
doubling of the base memory,
it just feels like a
particularly good deal.
Think of it this way,
the M4 iMac that also just got refreshed
is basically the exact same computer,
but just in an upright desktop
with a non replaceable display.
That starts at $1,299.
So you can use that $700 difference
to kind of get whatever screen you want.
Now, you can obviously also
upgrade from the base Mac mini,
but I don't think you
should, and I'll explain why.
See, Apple is known for building
what I've called a price ladder,
and they're just trying to get you
to climb as high as possible.
They do this across all their products,
but there's basically always
a really tempting upgrade
sitting right above the base model.
And then when you spend that money,
you're kind of right underneath
another tempting upgrade,
and then they kind of walk you up,
trying to get you to spend
as much money as possible.
It's really smart, they do it with iPhones
and with iPads and with everything else.
This base Mac mini, I'm
telling you is a good deal,
but it only has 256 gigs of storage.
And many people are fine with that
and they can live with that, that's great.
But if you know you're gonna
be working with a lot of media,
a lot of video,
then you start looking at
upgrades to the storage,
and that's where you'll
find that walking it up
to a terabyte costs 400 more dollars.
Or if you plan to do
some wired networking,
bumping it up to 10 gig ethernet costs
100 more dollars on top of that.
for the price of just those upgrades,
you could almost get an
entire nother MAC mini.
It's crazy.
Like basically, across the board,
Apple's upgrade pricing is
pretty crazy with this computer,
which is why I'm specifically saying
the base model is such a good deal.
And actually if you're lucky enough
to have a .edu email address right now,
the student discount drops it
down to 499, which is sick.
But once you know you're
gonna be doing upgrades
to the pre-purchase spec,
which you have to know before buying it,
'cause you can't upgrade
it after the fact,
all the memory, everything is built in,
then it becomes more of a normal deal.
I do wanna say this though.
So the third and final crazy
thing about this Mac Mini
is that the maxed out version has a case
for the best portable workstation Mac.
Now this doesn't apply to everybody.
This is coming from me,
someone who used to drag an
iMac Pro in a Pelican case
through the airport to events
because it was the fastest editing machine
that I could reasonably travel with,
and it actually made sense for me.
So coming from that perspective,
this new Mac mini is sick.
So looking at the Mac Studios,
those aren't upgraded to M4 yet,
they've all got the M2 generation.
And it's also not gonna be the Mac Pro,
which is also still on the M2 generation
and obviously not portable.
The iMac is on M4,
but there's no Pro chips, so
it's just the base M4 chip.
So this Mac mini is the easiest way
to pack an M4 Pro chip with you
and just throw it in a
travel bag super easily.
An equivalent spec'd
MacBook Pro with M4 Pro
starts at $2,000,
which is actually another
decently good deal
as far as performance.
But if you don't need a laptop
or if you just wanna plug
and play into monitors wherever you go,
1399 gets you the M4 Pro Mac mini.
And that upgrade also gets
you the back Thunderbolt ports
being Thunderbolt 5
instead of Thunderbolt 4.
So it can support three 6K
displays instead of two.
So I've had and been
testing the M4 Pro here
with 48 gigs of memory,
and fun fact, if you run through
some synthetic benchmarks,
this runs up the highest CPU
score of any desktop Mac ever.
That includes the Mac Pro
and the Mac Studios and all of them.
This is by far the most
powerful single core
we've ever seen by a lot.
And then Multi-Core just barely
tops Geekbench's all time Mac list,
though as we know, CPU doesn't
really bump up all that much
when you go from base
to Pro to Max to Ultra,
it's way more GPU stuff.
And so when you look at GPU benchmarks,
the most powerful Mac
mini here with the M4 Pro,
it was putting up M1 Max numbers,
which again, shows how much
these generations over time
have been improving and
stacking on top of each other.
I've been editing videos
on an M1 Max laptop
for three years now on the MacBook Pro.
So this Mac mini feels like
one of those impossibly small computers
Apple's like always
kind of wanted to make,
even before Apple silicon.
Like you probably remember
some of their earlier attempts,
like the "Trashcan" MAC Pro,
no doubt, they wanted do something crazy.
They wanted to put a
workstation-class computer on the desk
cooled by a single fan.
We saw how that went with
the Intel chip inside,
or even some of those
razor thin i9 MacBook Pros
that started having overheating issues.
But now that Apple silicon
has gotten this good
and this efficient over time,
they're actually able to
make tiny, powerful computers
like the Mac Studio
and now like this little
Mac mini over here.
Nobody was asking for the
Mac mini to be even smaller,
except for those people
in the Spaceship Campus
somewhere in California.
Well played.
Thanks for watching.
Catch you guys in the next one. Peace.
(chilled electronic music)